EXTRACTS 
(SUPPLIED BY A SUB-SUB-LIBRARIAN) 

IT will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and 
grub -worm of a poor devil of a Sub -Sub appears to have gone 
through the long Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth, pick- 
ing up whatever random allusions to whales he could anyways 
find in any book whatsoever, sacred or profane. Therefore 
you must not, in every case at least, take the higgledy-piggledy 
whale statements, however authentic, in these extracts, for 
veritable gospel cetology. Far from it. As touching the 
ancient authors generally, as well as the poets here appearing, 
these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as affording 
a glancing bird's-eye view of what has been promiscuously 
said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many 
nations and generations, including our own. 

So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commen- 
tator I am. Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe 
which no wine of this world will ever warm ; and for whom 
even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong ; but with whom 
one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too ; and 
grow convivial upon tears ; and say to them bluntly with full 
eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant 
sadness Give it up, Sub-Subs ! For by how much the more 
pains ye take to please the world, by so much the more shall 
ye forever go thankless ! Would that I could clear out 
Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye ! But gulp down 
your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts ; 
for your friends who have gone before are clearing out the 
seven-storied heavens, and making refugees of long-pampered 
Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming. Here 
ye strike but splintered hearts together there, ye shall 
strike unsplinterable glasses! 



xii 



EXTRACTS 

' And God created great whales.' 



Genesis. 



* Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him ; 
One would think the deep to be hoary.' 

Job. 

' Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up 
Jonah.' Jonah. 

' There go the ships ; there is that Leviathan whom thou 
hast made to play therein.' Psalms. 

' In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong 
sword, shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even 
Leviathan that crooked serpent ; and he shall slay the dragon 
that is in the sea.' Isaiah. 

* And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos 
of this monster's mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it 
goes all incontinently that foul great swallow of his, and 
perisheth in the bottomless gulf of his paunch.' 

HollancFs Plutarch's Morals. 

' The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes 
that are : among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called 
Balaene, take up as much in length as four acres or arpens of 
land.' Holland's Pliny. 

' Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when 
about sunrise a great many Whales and other monsters of 
the sea, appeared. Among the former, one was of a most 
monstrous size. * * * This came towards us, open- 
mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea 
before him into a foam.' 

Tooke's Lucian. The True History. 

xiii 



xiv MOBY-DICK 

' He visited this country also with a view of catching horse - 
whales, which had bones of very great value for their teeth, 
of which he brought some to the king. * * * The best 
whales were catched in his own country, of which some were 
forty-eight, some fifty yards long. He said that he was one 
of six who had killed sixty in two days.' 

Other or Octher's verbal narrative taken down 
from his mouth by King Alfred, A.D. 890. 

1 And whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, 
that enter into the dreadful gulf of this monster's (whale's) 
mouth, are immediately lost and swallowed up, the sea- 
gudgeon retires into it in great security, and there sleeps.' 
Montaigne 1 s Apology for Eaimond Sebond. 

' Let us fly, let us fly ! Old Nick take me if it is not 
Leviathan described by the noble prophet Moses in the life 
of patient Job.' Rabelais. 

' This whale's liver was two cart-loads.' 

Stowe's Annals. 

1 The great Leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like 
boiling pan.' Lord Bacon's Version of the Psalms. 

' Touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we 
have received nothing certain. They grow exceeding fat, 
insomuch that an incredible quantity of oil will be extracted 
out of one whale.' Ibid. History of Life and Death. 

1 The sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an in- 
ward bruise.' King Henry. 

' Very like a whale.' Hamlet. 

' Which to secure, no skill of leach's art 
Mote him availle, but to returne againe 
To his wound's worker, that with lowly dart, 
Dinting his breast, had bred his restless paine, 
Like as the wounded whale to shore flies thro' the maine.' 

The Fairie Queen. 

' Immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can 
in a peaceful calm trouble the ocean till it boil.' 

Sir William Davenant's Preface to Gondibert. 



EXTRACTS xv 

' What spermaceti! is, men might justly doubt, since the 
learned Hosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, 
Nescio quid sit.' 

Sir T. Browne's Of Sperma Ceti and the 
Sperma Ceti Whale. Vide his V.E. 

' Like Spencer's Talus with his modern flail 

He threatens ruin with his ponderous tail. 
****** 

Their fixed jav'lins in his side he wears, 
And on his back a grove of pikes appears.' 

Waller's Battle of the Summer Islands. 

' By art is created that great Leviathan, called a Common- 
wealth or State (in Latin, Civitas) which is but an artificial 
man.' Opening sentence of Hobbes's Leviathan. 

'Silly Mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had 
been a sprat in the mouth of a whale.' 

Pilgrim's Progress. 
* That sea beast 

Leviathan, which God of all his works 
Created hugest that swim the ocean stream.' 

Paradise Lost. 
4 There Leviathan, 

Hugest of living creatures, in the deep 
Stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims, 
And seems a moving land ; and at his gills 
Draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea.' 

Ibid. 

' The mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and 
have a sea of oil swimming in them.' 

Fuller's Profane and Holy State. 
' So close behind some promontory lie 

The huge Leviathans to attend their prey, 
And give no chace, but swallow in the fry, 

Which through their gaping jaws mistake the way.' 
Dry den's Annus Mirabilis. 

' While the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they 
cut off his head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it 
will come ; but it will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet 
water.' 

Thomas Edge's Ten Voyages to Spitzbergen, in Purchas. 



xvi MOBY-DICK 

* In their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, 
and in wantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes 
and vents, which nature has placed on their shoulders.' 

Sir T. Herberts Voyages into Asia and Africa. Harris Coll. 

4 Here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were 
forced to proceed with a great deal of caution for fear they 
should run their ship upon them.' 

Schouten's Sixth Circumnavigation. 

* We set sail from the Elbe, wind N.E. in the ship called 
The Jonas-in-the-Whale. * * * 

Some say the whale can't open his mouth, but that is a 
fable. * * * 

They frequently climb up the masts to see whether they 
can see a whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for his 
pains. * * * 

I was told of a whale taken near Shetland, that had above 
a barrel of herrings in his belly. * * * 

One of our harpooneers told me that he caught once a 
whale in Spitzbergen that was white all over.' 

A Voyage to Greenland, A.D. 1671. Harris Coll. 

' Several whales have come in upon this coast (Fife). Anno 
1652, one eighty feet in length of the whale -bone kind came 
in, which, (as I was informed) besides a vast quantity of oil, 
did afford 500 weight of baleen. The jaws of it stand for a 
gate in the garden of Pitferren.' 

Sibbald's Fife and Kinross. 

4 Myself have agreed to try whether I can master and kill 
this Sperma-ceti whale, for I could never hear of any of that 
sort that was killed by any man, such is his fierceness and 
swiftness.' 

Richard Strafford's Letter from the Bermudas. 
Phil. Trans. A.D. 1668. 

' Whales in the sea 
God's voice obey.' 

N. E. Primer. 

1 We saw also abundance of large whales, there being more 
in those southern seas, as I may say, by a hundred to one ; 
than we have to the northward of us.' 

Captain Cowley's Voyage round the Globe, A.D. 1729. 



EXTRACTS xvii 

****** an( j ^e breath of the whale is fre- 
quently attended with such an insupportable smell, as to 
bring on a disorder of the brain.' 

Ulloa's South America. 

1 To fifty chosen sylphs of special note, 
We trust the important charge, the petticoat. 
Oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail, 
Tho' stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale.' 

Rape of the Lock. 

' If we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with 
those that take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they 
will appear contemptible in the comparison. The whale is 
doubtless the largest animal in creation.' 

Goldsmith's Nat. Hist. 

' If you should write a fable for little fishes, you would 
make them speak like great whales.' 

Goldsmith to Johnson. 

' In the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, 
but it was found to be a dead whale, which some Asiatics had 
killed, and were then towing ashore. They seemed to en- 
deavour to conceal themselves behind the whale, in order to 
avoid being seen by us.' Cook's Voyages. 

' The larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. They 
stand in so great dread of some of them, that when out at 
sea they are afraid to mention even their names, and carry 
dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood, and some other articles of 
the same nature in their boats, in order to terrify and prevent 
their too near approach.' 

Uno Von Troil's Letters on Banks' s and 
Solander's Voyage to Iceland in 1772. 

' The Spermacetti Whale found by the Nantuckois, is 
an active, fierce animal, and requires vast address and bold- 
ness in the fishermen.' 

Thomas Jefferson's Whale Memorial to the 
French Minister in 1778. 

1 And pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it ? ' 

Edmund Burke's Reference in Parliament 

to the Nantucket Whale Fishery. 
VOL. I. b 



xviii MOBY-DICK 

' Spain a great whale stranded on. the shores of Europe.' 

Edmund Burke. (Somewhere.} 

' A tenth branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to 
be grounded on the consideration of his guarding and pro- 
tecting the seas from pirates and robbers, is the right to 
royal fish, which are whale and sturgeon. And these, when 
either thrown ashore or caught near the coast, are the pro- 
perty of the king.' Blackstone. 

c Soon to the sport of death the crews repair : 
Rodmond unerring o'er his head suspends 
The barbed steel, and every turn attends.' 

Falconer's Shipwreck. 

' Bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires, 

And rockets blew self driven, 
To hang their momentary fire 
Around the vault of heaven. 

' So fire with water to compare, 

The ocean serves on high, 

Up-spouted by a whale in air, 

To express unwieldy joy.' 

Cowper, On the Queen's Visit to London. 

' Ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart 
at a stroke, with immense velocity.' 

John Hunter's Account of the Dissection 
of a Whale. (A small-sized one.) 

' The aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main 
pipe of the water- works at London Bridge, and the water 
roaring in its passage through that pipe is inferior in impetus 
and velocity to the blood gushing from the whale's heart.' 

Paley's Theology. 

' The whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet.' 

Baron Cuvier. 

' In 40 degrees south, we saw Spermacetti Whales, but did 
not take any till the first of May, the sea being then covered 
with them.' 

Colnett's Voyage for the Purpose of Extending 
the Spermacetti Whale Fishery. 



EXTRACTS xix 

' In the free element beneath me swam, 
Floundered and dived, in play, in chace, in battle, 
Fishes of every colour, form, and kind ; 
Which language cannot paint, and mariner 
Had never seen ; from dread Leviathan 
To insect millions peopling every wave : 
Gather'd in shoals immense, like floating islands, 
Led by mysterious instincts through that waste 
And trackless region, though on every side 
Assaulted by voracious enemies, 
Whales, sharks, and monsters, arm'd in front or jaw, 
With swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs.' 

Montgomery' '<$ World before the Flood. 

' lo ! Paean ! lo ! sing, 
To the finny people's king. 
Not a mightier whale than this 
In the vast Atlantic is ; 
Not a fatter fish than he, 
Flounders round the Polar Sea.' 

CJiarles Lamb's Triumph of the Whale. 

' In the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing 
the whales spouting and sporting with each other, when one 
observed ; there pointing to the sea is a green pasture 
where our children's grand-children will go for bread.' 

Obed Macy's History of Nantucket. 

' I built a cottage for Susan and myself and made a gateway 
in the form of a Gothic Arch, by setting up a whale's jaw 
bones.' Hawthorne's Twice-Told Tales. 

' She came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who 
had been killed by a whale in the Pacific ocean, no less than 
forty years ago.' Ibid. 

' " No, Sir, 'tis a Right Whale," answered Tom ; " I saw his 
spout ; he threw up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a Christian 
would wish to look at. He 's a raal oil-butt, that fellow ! " ' 

Cooper's Pilot. 

' The papers were brought in,, and we saw in the Berlin 
Gazette that whales had been introduced on the stage there.' 
Eckermanris Conversations with Goethe. 



xx MOBY-DICK 

' " My God ! Mr. Chace, what is the matter ? " I answered, 
" We have been stove by a whale." ! 

Narrative of the Shipwreck of the Whale Ship 
Essex of Nantucket, which was attacked and 
finally destroyed by a large Sperm Whale in 
the Pacific Ocean. By Owen Chace of Nan- 
tucket, first mate of said vessel. New York, 
1821. 

' A mariner sat in the shrouds one night, 

The wind was piping free ; 

Now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale, 
And the phospher gleamed in the wake of the whale, 
As it floundered in the sea.' 

Elizabeth Oakes Smith. 

' The quantity of line withdrawn from the different boats 
engaged in the capture of this one whale, amounted alto- 
gether to 10,440 yards or nearly six English miles. * * * 

t Sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the 
air, which, cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of 
three or four miles.' Scoresby. 

1 Mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, 
the infuriated Sperm Whale rolls over and over ; he rears his 
enormous head, and with wide expanded jaws snaps at every- 
thing around him ; he rushes at the boats with his head ; 
they are propelled before him with vast swiftness, and some- 
times utterly destroyed. 

* * * It is a matter of great astonishment that the 
consideration of the habits of so interesting, and, in a com- 
mercial point of view, of so important an animal (as the Sperm 
Whale) should have been so entirely neglected, or should have 
excited so little curiosity among the numerous, and many of 
them competent observers, that of late years must have 
possessed the most abundant and the most convenient oppor- 
tunities of witnessing their habitudes. 5 

Thomas Beale's History of the Sperm Whale. 1839. 

' The Cachalot ' (Sperm Whale) ' is not only better armed 
than the True Whale ' (Greenland or Right Whale) ' in possess- 
ing a formidable weapon at either extremity of its body, 
but also more frequently displays a disposition to employ 
these weapons offensively, and in a manner at once so artful, 



EXTRACTS xxi 

bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its being regarded as the 
most dangerous to attack of all the known species of the 
whale tribe.' 

Frederick Debell Bennett's Whaling Voyage 
round the Globe. 1840. 

' October 13. " There she blows," was sung out from the 
mast-head. 

" Where away ? " demanded the captain. 

" Three points off the lee bow, sir." 

" Raise up your wheel. Steady ! " 

" Steady, sir." 

" Mast-head ahoy ! Do you see that whale now ? " 

" Ay, ay, sir ! A shoal of Sperm Whales ! There she 
blows ! There she breaches ! " 

" Sing out ! sing out every time ! " 

" Ay, ay, sir ! There she blows ! there there thar she 
blows bowes bo-o-o-s ! " 

" How far off ? " 

c< Two miles and a half." 

" Thunder and lightning ! so near ! Call all hands ! " 

J. Ross Browne's Etchings of a 
Whaling Cruise. 1846. 

4 The Whale-ship Globe, on board of which vessel occurred 
the horrid transactions we are about to relate, belonged to 
the island of Nantucket.' 

Narrative of the Globe Mutiny, by 
Lay and Hussey, Survivors. A.D. 1828. 

c Being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, 
he parried the assault for some time with a lance ; but the 
furious monster at length rushed on the boat ; himself and 
comrades only being preserved by leaping into the water 
when they saw the onset was inevitable. 5 

Missionary Journal of Tyerman and Bennett. 

' Nantucket itself,' said Mr. Webster, ' is a very striking 
and peculiar portion of the National interest. There is a 
population of eight or nine thousand persons, living here 
in the sea, adding largely every year to the National wealth 
by the boldest and most persevering industry.' 

Report of Daniel Webster's Speech in the U.S. 
Senate, on the Application for the Erection 
of a Breakwater at Nantucket. 1828. 



xxii . MOBY-DICK 

' The whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him 
in a moment.' 

The Whale and his Captors, or the Whale- 
man's Adventures and the Whale's Bio- 
graphy, gathered on the Homeward Cruise 
of the Commodore Preble. By Rev. Henry 
T. Cheever. 

' " If you make the least damn bit of noise," replied Samuel, 
" I will send you to hell." ' 

Life of Samuel Comstock (the Mutineer), by 
his Brother, William Comstock. Another 
Version of the Whale-ship Globe Narrative. 

' The voyages of the Dutch and English to the Northern 
Ocean, in order, if possible, to discover a passage through it 
to India, though they failed of their main object, laid open 
the haunts of the whale.' 

McCulloch's Commercial Dictionary. 

4 These things are reciprocal ; the ball rebounds, only to 
bound forward again ; for now in laying open the haunts 
of the whale, the whalemen seem to have indirectly hit upon 
new clews to that same mystic North -West Passage.' 

From ' Something ' unpublished. 

4 It is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean with- 
out being struck by her near appearance. The vessel under 
short sail, with look-outs at the mast-heads, eagerly scanning 
the wide expanse around them, has a totally different air 
from those engaged in a regular voyage.' 

Currents and Whaling. U.S. Ex. Ex. 

1 Pedestrians in the vicinity of London and elsewhere may 
recollect having seen large curved bones set upright in the 
earth, either to form arches over gateways, or entrances to 
alcoves, and they may perhaps have been told that these 
were the ribs of whales.' 

Tales of a Whale Voyager to the Arctic Ocean. 

' It was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these 
whales, that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession 
of the savages enrolled among the crew.' 

Newspaper Account of the Taking and Retaking 
of the Whale-ship Hobomack. 



EXTRACTS xxiii 

' It is generally well known that out of the crews of Whaling 
vessels (American) few ever return in the ships on board of 
which they departed.' Cruise in a Whale Boat. 

1 Suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and 
shot up perpendicularly into the air. It was the whale.' 

Miriam Coffin or the Whale Fisherman. 

' The Whale is harpooned to be sure ; but bethink you, 
how you would manage a powerful unbroken colt, with the 
mere appliance of a rope tied to the root of his tail.' 

A Chapter on WJialing in Ribs and Trucks. 

' On one occasion I saw two of these monsters (whales) 
probably male and female, slowly swimming, one after the 
other, within less than a stone's throw of the shore ' (Tierra 
del Fuego), ' over which the beech tree extended its branches.' 

Darwin's Voyage of a Naturalist. 

' " Stern all ! " exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his 
head, he saw the distended jaws of a large Sperm Whale 
close to the head of the boat, threatening it with instant 
destruction ; " Stern all, for your lives ! " 

Wharton the Whale Killer. 

' So be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail, 
While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! ' 

Nantucket Song. 

' Oh, the rare old Whale, mid storm and gale, 

In his ocean home will be 
A giant in might, where might is right, 
And King of the boundless sea.' 

Whale Song. 



MOBY-DICK 

CHAPTER I 

LOOMINGS 

CALL me Ishmael. Some years ago never mind how 
long precisely having little or no money in my purse, 
and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought 
I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the 
world. It is a way I have of driving off the spleen, and 
regulating the circulation. Whenever I find myself 
growing grim about the mouth ; whenever it is a damp, 
drizzly November in my soul ; whenever I find myself 
involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bring- 
ing up the rear of every funeral I meet ; and especially 
whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that 
it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from 
deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically 
knocking people's hats off then, I account it high time 
to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for 
pistol and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws 
himself upon his sword ; I quietly take to the ship. 
There is nothing surprising in this. If they but knew 
it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, 
cherish very nearly the same feelings toward the ocean 
with me. 

There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, 
belted round by wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs 
commerce surrounds it with her surf. Right and left, the 
streets take you waterward. Its extreme down -town is the 
battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and 

VOL. I. A 



2 MOBY-DICK 

cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of 
sight of land. Look at the crowds of water -gazers there. 

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath after- 
noon. Go from Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and 
from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What do you 
see ? Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, 
stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed 
in ocean reveries. Some leaning against the spiles ; 
some seated upon the pier-heads ; some looking over 
Vhe bulwarks of ships from China ; some high aloft in 
the rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward 
peep. But these are all landsmen ; of week days pent 
up in lath and plaster tied to counters, nailed to benches, 
clinched to desks. How then is this ? Are the green 
fields gone ? What do they here ? 

But look ! here come more crowds, pacing straight for 
the water, and seemingly bound for a dive. Strange ! 
Nothing will content them but the extremest limit of the 
land ; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses 
will not suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the 
water as they possibly can without falling in. And there 
they stand miles of them leagues. Inlanders all, they 
come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues north, 
east, south, and west. Yet here they all unite. Tell me, 
does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses 
of all those ships attract them thither ? 

Once more. Say, you are in the country ; in some 
high land of lakes. Take almost any path you please, 
and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves 
you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in it. 
Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his 
deepest reveries stand that man on his legs, set his feet 
a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water 
there be in all that region. Should you ever be athirst 
in the great American desert, try this experiment, if your 



LOOMINGS 3 

caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical 
professor. Yes, as everyone knows, meditation andli 
water are wedded forever. 

But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the 
dreamiest, shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of 
romantic landscape in all the valley of the Saco. What 
is the chief element he employs ? There stand his trees, 
each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix 
were within ; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep 
his cattle ; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy 
smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, 
reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in 
their hillside blue. But though the picture lies thus 
tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs 
like leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were 
vain, unless the shepherd's eye were fixed upon the 
magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June, 
when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee -deep 
among tiger-lilies what is the one charm wanting ?- 
Water there is not a drop of water there ! Were Niagara 
but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand 
miles to see it ? Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, 
upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver, deliberate 
whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or 
invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach ? 
Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust 
healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to 
sea ? Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did 
you yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when first ; 
told that you and your ship were now out of sight of ' 
land ? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy ? 
Why did the Greeks give it a separate deity, and own 
brother of Jove ? Surely all this is not without meaning. 
And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus, 
who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild 



4 MOBY-DICK 

image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was 
drowned. But that same image, we ourselves see in all 
rivers and oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable 
phantom of life ; and this is the key to it all. 

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea 
whenever I begin to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin 
to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not mean to have 
it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger. For to 
go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a 
purse is but a rag unless you have something in it. Be- 
sides, passengers get sea-sick grow quarrelsome don't 
sleep of nights do not enjoy themselves much, as a 
general thing ; no, I never go as a passenger ; nor, 
though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a 
Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the 
glory and distinction of such offices to those who like 
them. For my part, I abominate all honourable respect- 
able toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind what- 
soever. It is quite as much as I can do to take care 
of myself, without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, 
schooners, and what not. And as for going as cook, 
though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a 
cook being a sort of officer on shipboard yet, somehow, 
I never fancied broiling fowls ; though once broiled, 
judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and 
peppered, there is no one who will speak more respect- 
fully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I 
will. It is out of the idolatrous do tings of the old 
Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that 
you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge 
bake-houses the pyramids. 

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right 
before the mast, plumb down into the forecastle, aloft 
there to the royal mast-head. True, they rather order 
me about some, and make me jump from spar to spar, 



LOOMINGS 5 

like a grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this 
sort of thing is unpleasant enough. It touches one's 
sense of honour, particularly if you come of an old estab- 
lished family in the land, the Van Rensselaers, or Ran- 
dolphs, or Hardicanutes. And more than all, if just 
previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have 
been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the 
tallest boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a 
keen one, I assure you, from a schoolmaster to a sailor, 
and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and the Stoics 
to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears 
off hi time. 

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders 
me to get a broom and sweep down the decks ? What 
does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in the 
scales of the New Testament ? Do you think the arch- 
angel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I 
promptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that 
particular instance ? Who ain/t a slave ? Tell me that. 
Well, then, however the~old^sea -captains may order me 
about however they may thump and punch me about, 
I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right ; 
that everybody else is one way or other served in much the 
same way either in a physical or metaphysical point of 
view, that is ; and so the universal thump is passed 
round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder- 
blades, and be content. 

Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make 
a point of paying me for my trouble, whereas they never 
pay passengers a single penny that I ever heard of. On 
the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And 
there is all the difference in the world between paying 
and being paid. The act of paying is perhaps the most 
uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves 
entailed upon us. But being paid, what will compare 



6 MOBY-DICK 

with it ? The urbane activity with which a man receives 
money is really marvellous, considering that we so 
earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, 
and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. 
Ah ! how cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition ! 

Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the 
wholesome exercise and pure air of the forecastle deck. 
For as in this world, head-winds are far more prevalent 
than winds from astern (that is, if you never violate 
the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the com- 
modore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at 
second hand from the sailors on the forecastle. He thinks 
he breathes it first ; but not so. In much the same 
way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many other 
things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it. 
But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt 
the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into 
my head to go on a whaling voyage ; this the invisible 
police-officer of the Fates, who has the constant surveil- 
lance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in 
some unaccountable way he can better answer than any 
one else. And, doubtless, my going on this whaling 
voyage formed part of the grand programme of Provi- 
dence that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in 
as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more exten- 
sive performances. I take it that this part of the bill 
must have run something like this : 

' Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the 
United States. 

' WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. 

1 BLOODY BATTLE IN AFGHANISTAN.' 

Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those 
stage managers, the Fates, put me down for this shabby 



LOOMINGS 7 

part of a whaling voyage, when others were set down 
for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and easy 
parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces 
though I cannot tell why this was exactly ; yet, now that 
I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little 
into the springs and motives which, being cunningly 
presented to me under various disguises, induced me to 
set about performing the part I did, besides cajoling me 
into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my 
own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment. 

Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea 
of the great whale himself. Such a gortentous and 
mysterious monster roused all my curiosity. Then the 
wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk ; 
the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale ; these, 
with all the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian 
sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my wish. With 
other men, perhaps, such things would not have been 
inducements ; but as for me, I am tormented with an 
everlasting itch for things remote. I love to sail for- 
bidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring 
what is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could 
still be social with it would they let me since it is 
but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of 
the place one lodges in. 

By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage 
was welcome ; the great flood-gates of the wonder-world 
swung open, and in the wild conceits that swayed me to 
my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost 
soul, endless processions of the whale, and, midmost of 
them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in 
the air.
